because I know who I am.
You can just say your name.
But first, I have to excuse my bad English, and maybe you could help me.
If you could just say your name.
Yes, my name is Uwe Hargelin, and I've been working with books since the early 1960s.
I was interested in books and was a small collector even before that date, and I
was mostly collecting art, graphic art and Japanese woodcut prints and so on at that time.
But I met a very good friend who was older than me who was collecting Japanese illustrated books and also Japanese woodblock prints in about 1960, 61.
And that perhaps started my career as a collector
So I collected both graphic and Japanese woodblock prints, and also illustrated books, and also avant-garde books, Dada, and so on at that time.
Back in 1963, I think, I started as an employee at Rennell's Antiquariat.
It was the biggest
in quantity the antiquarian bookshop here in Sweden where I would say in whole Scandinavia and it was also called the Stockholm catacombs because many people they couldn't find their way out when they had gone down in the cellar and it was a fascinating place I don't know if you Lars
went there as a customer but not as an employee and in fact I remember one night and I wasn't there but we closed at 6 o'clock and about in midnight Mr. Rennell himself got a telephone call at 4 in the night and it was from a customer who had found his way up the
the stairs to the first floor and have a telephone.
Got locked in.
And he wanted to get out.
Well, I was working there for about, yes, the whole 60s, I would say.
And more and more I was interested in the old books, and especially in science and natural history and medicine.
It was also me who took care then of the old book collection at Rennell's.
And also started with plates and maps and decorated prints and so on.
And then this very traditional place closed and moved some hundred meters up the street to a modern establishment.
Yes.
And at that time, we had our first child.
The first one, I'm sorry?
Yes.
Me and my wife had our first child.
I was in 1969.
And I stopped working at that time and took care of him.
And my wife was working at the SAS, the Scandinavian Airline System.
And we have free tickets all over the world at that time.
And so we start also to go to foreign continents.
It was in Los Angeles, for instance.
And we met Jake Zeitlin and Ewe Dawson and John Howell and all of them.
You met the great ones.
I miss Haskell Norman and all of them.
But it was only California, I would say.
And then I was searching also for Japanese books.
So I was in 1966 in Japan, in Kyoto.
And then I found a lot of books for my own private collection.
But at the same time, I started with my first catalogue.
It was a very mediocre catalogue, but it was in many medical books in it.
And since that, I have produced about 24 catalogs, I think.
But in the middle of the 1980s, I was invited by the librarian for the Swedish Society of Medicine.
And I heard that they had very good holdings of old books, but none had seen them.
So I went there, and it was the 9th of October,
1986.
And that was about 2 p.m.
And we started with something to eat.
And I was surprised because they had no books in the library.
It was only modern medical periodicals.
And they told me that the books were stored in the cellar.
And we went down.
And the light wasn't on, so they had to go to
had a thick lamp.
There's a flash lamp to find something wrong there.
And meanwhile, they were away from me.
I took out one volume from some shelves that was marked Ischelenia.
And it was a rather thick volume in half vellum.
It was an early 17th century volume.
And I found about 30 medical treatises in it, mostly dissertations.
And I started from the end, you know, so, and found alchemical tracts, extremely rare things.
Now, what kind of tracts?
Alchemy.
Alchemy, yes.
And then it was handled about the discovery of the thoracic duct,
and the lymphatic system.
And I found Professor Thomas Bartholin, you know, the very famous professor of medicine and anatomy at Copenhagen.
I found the first edition of all his papers on that discovery.
And you know, we have also here in Sweden, Olo Frudbeck, who discovered the lymphatic system at the same time, or even before.
But he published a bit later, about one month later, which gave rise to a very polemic discussion back.
All these discoveries were made in one night?
You made all of these?
Yes, yes, yes.
And when I counted in my head, I was valued at about...
500,000 when I had come to... Half of the volume crowns, right?
500,000 crowns.
That's not insignificant.
Yes, and then I went on, and it was handled about the circulation of the blood.
William Harvey.
Yes, you can understand.
And it was many papers against Harvey.
And I found, for instance, primrose excitationes,
one of the harshest attack for Harvey, against Harvey.
And I think it's known in only five or ten copies.
And then when they come back, I would put back the volume in the shadow.
And I only took a quick sight on the first page.
And then I recognized the very famous titled page of Harvey's Demoticordis.
And it was fully complete.
And then I... Did these people know what we were doing?
No, they knew.
Most librarians in Sweden, they knew very little about their old collections.
And you were there mainly to tell them what they had?
Yes, yes.
Then came the curious thing.
I told them that it was a very important book.
But they didn't understand that, and I had to explain who Harvey was, but nothing happened.
Then I had to explain that I knew another copy, which was not complete, and it was without other papers bound separately, which had sold at Christie's some years earlier, for I think 100,
20,000 pounds and then they they were interested so I was invited to go through the whole collection in the cellar and it was about one kilometer it was about let's say 80,000 volumes
And then I picked out 500 volumes of that class, not in the economic sense, but 500 books, which I mean was a ground for a medical historical rare book collection.
And I asked them, why shouldn't I also tell all the members in the Swedish Society of Medicine, there are about 20,000 of them, that they have a library and that there are also many, many fine and interesting and important books in it.
And at that time there were some also female physicians who had became members of the board.
And after that meeting they said that it was not so interesting because there were no female authors among those.
And then I... So next meeting I have made a quite different... What do you call it?
Suggestion.
Proposed, yes.
I made two books.
One very important medical books in the Library of the Swedish Society of Medicine and one book called The Woman's Book.
And it was taken by acclamation.
That's right.
And I made two books.
And when those were published, they were very... Kindly met outside Sweden, in England, in the United States.
Was this a catalog with you?
Yes, it's a richly illustrated and annotated catalog.
I can show you the books later.
And this was just about 10 years ago, 1986?
Yes, the first book was published, I think, in 87, 88.
But had these books just been there?
They had never been touched by it.
I was the first.
But how long had they been there?
I was like the princess to life.
So I get your names right when you speak.
Do you want me to just write your name?
Yes, I can give you my capital.
And then the Karolinska Institute, which is well-known for you, I think.
They decide about the Nobel Prize in Medicine and Physiology.
They had an even greater library.
It's about two and a half kilometres of old books.
So I made also another catalogue of them, and then I proposed that
I thought it would be very good to assemble all those rarities under one roof where they should be taken care of in a better way than earlier.
And also a library, or I mean more a museum, a book museum than a library.
And then...
Since that, I've also made two other catalogues for two other medical libraries in Stockholm.
It's for the old Society for Gymnastics in Sweden, which is the first of its kind in the whole world, and also for the Swedish Pharmaceutical Society.
And now we have assembled those books under one roof, and this year I also was made
medical doctor honoris causa for my work with those old books and then since about only some weeks ago i've got free hands to be to build up this and i started who who acquired the books in the first place all books have been donated there are gifts everything no book is a
purchased by the library.
It's only gifts and donations from physicians, and very distinguished physicians in Sweden.
We have, for instance, books from Linné's library and from Rosenstein's library, from every of those.
And this goes back how long?
Yes, the Karolinska Institute, you know, they started in 1810 about.
But then they had to take over all the books in the library of the Collegium Medicum, which started all there in 1668.
But they had no books at that time.
But in the, I would say, in the 1740s and 50s, they got great collections from switch physicians who had been abroad.
You see, in Sweden we couldn't take the doctor's diploma in Sweden.
We had to go up to, mostly to the Netherlands.
For the medical doctor?
Yes, for the medical, yes.
Especially to Leiden.
And those trips, many physicians bought some books, of course, to come to Sweden.
And both back in the nails, they took their diploma.
in Holland.
And all Swedish decisions before 1740, about.
So I think the first donation was by Johan von Hoorn, who is called the father of Swedish obstetrics.
And he gave some books already in the end of the 17th century to the College of America.
How old is this society?
How many hundreds of years?
I can't give you an example.
The 1660s.
About the 1660s.
So they've been gathering books for 300 years.
But the old one that they haven't read before in the North London.
And they didn't have a clue as to what they had.
No, never.
But you see... I'm the first one.
Were they well taken care of?
I'm the first one.
You're the first one.
Now you have the years.
Yes.
In the end of the 18th century, there were some people who collected books for professors, medical professors who collected books for their pupils.
That's a great story.
And one of them was Anders Johan Hagströmer.
I can show you a picture of him later.
He collected about several thousands of books.
which he had at his home.
And his home was the library for the medical students.
And he also was head of the surgical society in Sweden.
And he also was the first surgeon who became professor in anatomy.
And he also became the first, what you call it, chief of the Karinska Institute.
And he then was a very old man.
But he took care of all those books.
And he moved them from the old town, if you have seen it here in Stockholm, over to another part of town.
It's only about 200 meters over the sea.
And that was the first place for the Karinska Institute.
Can I ask a tough question?
Yes.
What happened?
How is it they didn't know what they had?
Wasn't anybody interested in the book?
It's out-of-date literature.
That's the reason.
I think the problem is that today's librarians, at least in Sweden, they...
don't can... ...skilja... ...skilja mellan gamla böcker... ...difference by... ...by... ...literature and books.
That is two quite different things.
I'm only interested in the books, the physical book.
I'm not interested in what it is in it.
The literature and the author is mostly when you talk about three or four hundred old books.
The less interesting thing, it could be the binding, it could be the provenance, it could be the printer, where it is printed, when, everything.
The 3M papers and everything.
And its place in history, of course.
Like in museum objects.
So this does not mean that there is an indifference to books.
It's just an indifference to books that
are not relevant to what they're doing.
They're obsolete.
They only keep in the... So there is no antiquarian spirit, so to speak.
Or maybe some of them... Of course I'm interested in what the text is about.
That you can see in my commentaries to the books.
But if you don't save all this treasure,
They have nothing to research in the future.
When they asked you to come in, was it with the intention of selling the material or just telling them what they had?
No, no.
Yes, it was to tell them what they had.
Why did they suddenly wish to know?
Yes, it was something.
They get a fine book.
They could gather in a present to visitors.
The Nobel Prize wins, of course.
They all get my books.
because it was something to give away.
And they have a lot of visitors at the Carolinas Institute, for instance, of course, from abroad.
So these books have not been catalogued then, right?
Yes, they had a card with the author and title and so on.
And there's a card catalogued?
Yes, but I had no idea about any value or if it was old.
If it was from the 16th century, it was an out-of-date literature.
Can they have a library?
And I can tell you that it was three more libraries, medical libraries in Stockholm.
It was at the Garnifons, the military hospital.
It was in the Serafimel Lazaret.
It was the oldest one.
The great collections, I think.
And it was also the barn, the childbirth house.
And it was grounded by
Schultz von Schultzenheim, who went over in the 1740s to London to study vaccination or varioliation.
But he happened to learn from Smelly the art of obstetrics instead.
And he came home and was the greatest obstetrician in Sweden.
And he was one of the greatest book collectors during the 18th century in medical books.
And in the 1960s and 70s, those old institutions, those three I have mentioned here, was closed down.
And all the libraries went to containers and was burnt.
And especially at the childbirth hospital, it was even worse because, you see, we have a tradition here in Sweden to have a very fine fire.
In the end of April.
The last day in April, we had a great fire.
Every year.
When did you find those books?
When?
In the beginning of 1970s, I think.
And they took out all the old books, the out-of-date books printed before 1800 and had a fire for them.
Yes, but they saved some absolute...
Invalued books.
Invalued books from the 17th century.
And also some books have already been... Get to the containers also in Swedish Society of Medicine and the Karinska Institute.
But very few, very few.
Very few.
And in the Karinska Institute Library I found some extremely fine things.
especially those things which the Swedish took as a war boat in the Emperor Rudolf II's treasure chamber in Prague in 1648.
And I think I have one of the finest books, printed books, in that collection now at the Haakströme Library, which we call this librarian building up now, after that man I told him about.
Now this library you're building up is...
It's in the same, it's on the Karinska Institute campus.
And I moved in in the old... Yes, of the Nobel Committee for Medicine and Physiology.
It's not a very good place, but we start there, we will see.
This house would be much better.
Thank you.
Please identify yourself.
And also write your name down here.
I will give you my card.
Yes, my name is Mats Renström and I'm an antiquarian book dealer.
Antiquarian book deal is specializing in old Swedish books and manuscripts and autographs and in reference books, bibliography and literature of history and history of literature and history of ideas.
How old are you, might I ask?
I'm 31.
I'm curious how a young man gets into it.
Yes, I began as a collector at
I was 11 or 12 when I began visiting antiquarian bookshops.
He was one of the most clever on old books in Sweden, even when he was 15 years old.
No, no, not at 15.
And I've always...
Professionally, I began 1986.
You were 21?
20.
Yes.
And started my own business in 1991 here in Stockholm.
And... Now, if you don't mind, I interrupt every now and then.
Yes, please ask.
Is there a clientele in Sweden?
Are there collectors here?
Yes, there are.
I'm specializing to help building up collections and find books for collectors.
Yes, both for private collectors and for libraries and other institutions.
Inside and outside Sweden?
Yes, that's right.
I have some of my fine institutional clients outside Sweden.
They are collecting Swedish books, old Swedish books and reference material.
And also your connection to this place, can you tell?
Yes, we have had connections since 1991 when I started and I have helped Lars
building up the reference library, for example.
Maybe you could both answer this.
How considerable is your stock, your general stock?
Do you have a good set?
I don't know the size of it.
It could be 5,000 or 10,000 books.
And my own reference library is 10,000 or 15,000 books.
So you reference, and yours?
Yes, a tremendous one.
I have a reference library about 150 years.
I think it's 250.
I don't know how many there are.
But I also sold out a lot of it.
But about Mads, I would say that about Swedish old imprints.
He is the greatest ever in Sweden.
Yes.
Swedish imprints.
So where do you find them?
I buy books at auctions from colleagues and whole or part of libraries, private.
Describe for me what Swedish... This sounds like a stupid question, I know, but just tell me Swedish imprints, what they comprised.
kinds of things yeah yes there are all kind of books of course the first printed books is from 1483 but you find items like that no no no books from the 15th century at all out at the market more than leaves from them but but 16th century books you find
But you have stopped at 1850?
Yes, something like that.
Not exactly.
Earlier in 1850.
And one other area like books, bond books.
Yes.
And bibliographies and so on.
Have you ever sold a book from the 15th century?
Swedish ones, not only leaves of Swedish books, but of course I have some incanabulas, but not Swedish, not from other countries.
Swedish incanabula you can't find in complete books.
Yes, one, very afraid.
At that time, maybe even today.
The Swedish 16th and 17th century imprints are extremely rare.
They were printed in small editions.
There were not so many books in Sweden at that time, and the books were really read and handled.
For a long time.
They are extremely rare.
16th century Italian books is not an especially rare thing.
We read to death and we read in cats.
A very interesting thing is the Reformation in Sweden.
They destroyed all books, I would say, they could find.
And especially the old manuscripts.
So in Swedish art keeps, we have the greatest collection in the world in the number of titles, I think, of old books.
In Sweden we have what now?
The greatest number of old manuscripts before the age of printing.
But they're only fragments which they have found in their...
covers of old books.
They have used them as covers.
I have some examples.
They made the cardboard.
I know what that means from old books.
From old manuscripts.
I just saw up at Mainz the other day at the Gutenberg Museum they have a
It's a leaf that precedes the 42-line Bible.
And it was probably the same, that's how they found it.
It was used in the writing of the book.
And most of the old books in Sweden, they have found in that way.
I told you about this Klemming, the National Library, which we saw in the portrayal of the National Library.
It was doing that, just that.
Say it now at the table, when your chance comes, a big
I'd like to have that on tape, okay?
That's cool.
Yes, Clemming was really fantastic.
Do you know more about him?
Yes.
Well, tell me about him.
Give me his full name, too.
Yeah, Gustav Edvard.
I can write it down.
Okay.
I mean, where two is, where the number two is.
That's you, you're two, you're one, two, three.
Yes, now you think I'm Gustav Edvard Clemming, and that's not very right.
Here's another Clemming.
In fact, he looks like it.
If you tell an anecdote, it is that the old Clemming, he was very conscious about the Royal Library.
He was wearing a large coat with big pockets.
When he was visiting friends or private collectors, they always were, what do you call it, taking around him when they were saying goodbye.
Because they wanted to feel if he were carrying away something to the Royal Library.
From their collections.
And that is, so therefore he built it up in different ways.
And that is a change from that.
Gustav Elvar Klemming was
of a wealthy family and began as a private collector in the 1830s.
And his brother started an antiquarian book business in the 40s, Clemmings Antiquariat.
And the second brother was a well-known photographer.
Yes.
And Clemming began working at the Royal Library in the 40s, 1840s.
He was at the Royal Palace.
Yes, when he was still in Baranot's library.
And he donated all of his own collections to the Royal Library.
and began to systematically collect Swedish books from all times.
As Niklas has told you, he found these leaves of the oldest printed Swedish books.
They found them in the covers for archives.
Yes, for example.
And he also was traveling around in Sweden to the churches and in Finland also found leaves.
So was he doing a systematic search for leafs?
Yes, for leafs.
In the bindings of books?
Yes, and in the bindings of archives, the documents.
So now it becomes very interesting to me.
Yes, he is a really interesting person.
But his interest wasn't only in the oldest books.
He was interested in all Swedish printed books.
So he also bought huge lawn, bibliothek, circulating libraries from the beginning of the 19th century to get
to get the novels that have not been saved by his, what is it?
Can I say something?
It's rather curious because in Sweden we have a law from about 1660
that every book should be preserved.
1661.
Well, I've heard it differently.
Every book should be sent to the royal palace, not necessarily preserved.
They want to see if it's something, you know.
Yes.
Yeah, that's also, it's a censor.
It also should be preserved, but it needs to work.
No, the librarians at the 18th century and the beginning of the 19th century, they thought that
Another ABC book and another novel of no interest.
So they had pretty regular book drawings?
I don't know how they get back.
Probably they gave it to the children and their wives.
A lot of war voters had come to Stockholm from the 30 years war.
And it came to the royal castle.
It was the old castle, three crowns.
It was in the same place as the nowadays castle, if you have been there.
But it was... And that one was burnt down in 1697.
And I would say that most of the books were... Two-thirds, yes.
It was destroyed, yes.
But the problem... But that wasn't deliberate.
That was... It was a fire.
And all other books, which they do take care of from the war bookies,
They were sorted out by the librarian of Queen Kristina.
And they were sent to different places to Lund in the south of Sweden.
To Åbo, Finland?
But especially to Finland, to Åbo University, because they had no books at all.
And Gustavus Adolfus, he wanted them to have a library also to Åbo.
So many books were sent to Åbo.
Those books from the Swedish war builders who came to Obo, they were all burnt in 1877.
Of course, the whole town was burnt out.
so no books at all is left from there not by librarians this time no no librarians as we know we don't go downtown only books at that time it wasn't the librarians but was claiming he was systematically building up a a swedish collection a national collection of books
and he was really successful he was the founder of the swedish national library scientifically he was the first yeah he collated the books for example that was he's the founder of the national library in sweden yes but he was selling books like
He actually included some of the original leaves in his videography.
I think it was good also because it was really duplicates.
And he sent out this bibliography.
He has been really criticised, mostly in the 20th century, mostly from a librarian point of view.
But I think...
all of the questions he was also human because he had two families but he avoided them so he more in the end of his life he lived in the library
because it was too troublesome to join the family.
There are many children too.
Yes, I was four, but in one family.
But he has two families.
In one side he was a big man in what he was doing, but he also had a sort of social life.
There is a photograph in the Royal Library.
Is there anything written about him, do you think?
Was he passionate about books?
Absolutely.
Yes, really.
Mostly he was really a collector.
I think he was the best collector ever in Sweden.
But when his portraiture will find that you can't... He's...
Your incarnation.
We were walking by and you said, we paused, and you said, you know, take a look at that picture, that painting.
Which was good.
Which was quite nice.
You haven't already seen it?
We had a very like National Museum.
He was showing us around and we went past the
portraying.
I had a very interesting day yesterday to the Nobel Library and then in the morning and then to the National Library in the afternoon.
Bang, bang, bang.
I heard from Lars that you shall leave tomorrow or tomorrow.
Because if I had known this before, I could have shown you the library, the medical library, which I think is one of the only libraries which can be shown every book.
in a very special way.
But tomorrow, it's... It's closed.
So it's an alarm, what you know.
An alarm alarm.
On Sunday, it's called alarm?
Yes, alarm is on.
I know exactly what you're saying.
If we go in, the police will come.
Yes.
So who primarily do you deal with, private collectors or institutions?
I tried to fill up the local vacances in the royal library that Clemming left, for example, trying to find the books.
So, say that again.
What do you try to do?
complete the collections, the Swedish collections, for example, in the Royal Library.
Is this a mission on your part?
Yes, I think it's a mission for me.
Especially there are a lot of Swedish books printed in the United States, you know, in the end of the last century.
Because it was a lot of immigrants who published in Swedish.
And those books don't have
They have a lot of them, but they have a lot of them.
They don't have them.
Yes, they are.
They seem to try to fill in books that were lost.
Some of the printers at countryside in Sweden were not sending their books as they should have done to the Royal Library.
So clearly you must have...
What you must do is check the national catalog.
Yes.
And you acquire books, you see books, you check it.
I acquire books.
A passionate dealer.
Working for the national library.
Uppsala University Library also.
Really?
And have you found a lot for them?
Yes.
I have found a lot of books.
You would love to have the old part of the catalog on the internet as well.
Yes, but it's not so troublesome.
A lot of the books are... Today you have a part of national bibliography on... Not on internet, but you can get... Telnet.
Telnet, yes.
What has been your most exciting discovery, would you say?
Have you had any really exciting... Yes, I have had a lot of exciting... Have you had any... At night... Yes.
An American... From an American point of view, I had extremely interesting... I found... I was in the attic on a big castle in Southern Sweden, Trollholm.
going through their archives.
And especially a part with unsorted items.
And there I found a letter on 11 pages, I think it was, from Erik Björk.
He dated 1711 in Pennsylvania.
He was the Swedish minister of the Swedish church in Delaware.
We had, for a short time, Sweden had a small colony in Delaware.
New Sweden.
New Sweden, yes.
You know, in Worcester, Massachusetts, which is where I worked, there was a huge Swedish population, one of the largest in the country.
But this we lost already in the 70th century to the Netherlands.
The ordinary colonies.
One time we owned a part of your country.
Nowadays you own ours.
No, no, I have two bubbles.
I found an 11 pages long letter from Pennsylvania in 1711 or 1713.
Maybe they had a car in it.
Yes, and the letter, in the letter he was pledging for Swedish books for the church, for his church, and he has a long list of the books that has arrived, that has already arrived from Sweden to America.
And this letter is now in the Morris Library at Delaware University.
And this was really very early.
Yes, it was.
Because I write about in my book James Logan, who came to Pennsylvania in 1699.
He was William Penn's assistant.
Of course, he was brilliant.
He was a genius.
And of course, there were no books over there.
So I write about how he got books.
This is kind of... This was already in the 1640s.
1630s.
And where were they in the 1630s?
Tell about it.
Because 1620 is when the first settlement landed in Massachusetts.
Yes, so we were in Massachusetts.
There's a celebration here.
If you could note that Sweden was the greatest country
in Europe, all we done.
During Gustavus Adolf, and also two other kings, up to Charles XII.
It was the greatest country in the whole Europe.
Yeah.
Great military power.
How about culturally?
Yes.
As I said, military power, not culturally.
But we had Descartes on a short visit before he died here in Stockholm.
Yes.
We killed him.
I think it's the greatest.
He came to teach Christine.
She wanted him to get up early every morning and get pneumonia and he died.
Five o'clock in the morning.
He invented some coordinate system for mathematics inside an oven down in Bavaria.
And then he came to, because he was thinking very well in heat.
Yeah.
And then it came to Sweden.
In code.
Yes, and you can imagine directly.
If I may say, should we go around to the table?
Maybe we could go back again to different questions.
And say your name so we have it in the same.
Yes, my name is Lars Forsberg.
And you're going to have to either write it down for me.
Yes, I'll give you some.
Okay, great.
I actually read your book six months ago.
I borrowed Uwe's copy.
I'll tell you a cute story when you're done about it.
Before I start, I could say something about his book.
Because... ...about Steve Blomberg's collection.
And that was so fascinating for me.
And I would like to write something about Steve Blomberg.
And I had your article in my answer.
I'll help you.
And we also, I think, Lars, have you already ordered the... No, but I have called the Peterson Court Report.
Yes.
It's expensive.
Yes, because if you write it well, it could be some critics also for the Swedish libraries.
I have all the stuff.
But because Stephen Blomberg...
He saved the books from the libraries.
Well, that's what he said.
Yes, that is part of it.
You know what I mean.
That was his defence of the trial.
Yes, yes.
You can see what I mean.
It's a good picture.
You can see.
Overthold me.
But if you write it very well, you can have some... I can't spell it in English.
I have feeling for the man.
We'll talk about it.
But okay.
I was very fascinated by this haven or more that you wrote on.
Yes, and when my book is...
When the new book is published in 1999, I hope, if I'm done, my publisher will issue a new edition of my book in a paperback, at which point I hope to bring you all up to date on Haven of War.
That's very interesting.
And I do have the rest of the story on him.
I wrote an article on Sotheby's 150th anniversary.
And then I came up with this, you know, well, The Garden Limited catalogue.
And I read this Hemantle Moore's, what to say, essay on... And what was your reaction when you saw that?
I think it was a very, very strange guy, because... You can be stronger than that.
Well, he was, yeah, I don't know what to say in English, but he was very... Crazy?
Yeah, well, absurd in a way.
Queer.
Yes, queer, yes.
Because it didn't...
First I read his own epilogue, his foreword.
Which was impenetrable.
Yes, what do you call it?
Impenetrable.
Yes, exactly.
Where he put himself in a long tradition back to the 11th century or something.
And then his epilogue...
He is.
Okay, I can imagine that.
This guy built up one of the greatest collections in the garden.
I'll be happy with the table first.
Okay, okay.
Which is even more fascinating.
I can imagine he threatened me with a $15 million lawsuit.
That's a lot of money.
It was bought by Mrs. Crawford, who has sold it then to the valid museum in New York, back again to America.
In the pocket edition.
I don't know the name, it's the world's most famous name.
Museum of Dance in New York.
It's a special name for it, I can't remember.
I'm sitting here because I am a collector.
Oven Matz has been trying to complete my collection for a couple of years.
And then I'm the editor of a rare book journal in Sweden.
In English it's called The Book Friend.
It was established in 1946.
I've been the editor for three years.
But maybe a new book friend.
Yes, I will give you a breakdown of a new book friend.
Just keep typing.
Okay.
I would say that the book friend has existed a long time, but when Lois started it is the new book friend, the new is not within, but it is quite different.
Has it been uninterrupted?
No, it is quite different.
It was quite a nice journal in the 40s and 50s.
That precedes, actually, the book collector in England, which is... Yes, yes.
It had its... You can say that the journal had its roots or tradition in the... Well, when the working classes began to...
Yes, I do.
Stay in front of us, by the way, because I have to turn on the other side.
When the working classes began to read in Sweden in the 30s and 40s, and when every small city in Sweden had its, you know, small bourgeois middle class that were book collectors in one way or the other, you know, the dentist, the priest, the professor, and all of them had their own small collection at home.
Mostly some of them were bibliophiles, you know, they were collecting illustrated books and things like that.
Actually, let me just interrupt.
We have a very interesting...
Here we have two booksellers, a collector, a librarian, bookseller, and a scout, a seller, an entrepreneur.
I'm both a rare book librarian.
And a rare book librarian.
And I'm also a bookseller.
And a bibliographer.
And a bookseller.
All of these things.
And I think I'm one of the four or five booksellers in Sweden, which together with
must are known abroad.
Most of the adequate booksellers in Sweden are mostly second-hand books, you know.
That's right.
We are dealing with old Arab books.
Not so many Arab books.
It's a small country, though.
We have to take into account, what, six million people?
Nine.
About eight.
On the other hand, we have many booksellers compared to our population.
Sure.
Yes, second-hand booksellers.
I read a lot today.
Well, last week I was down printing the very last issue of the journal.
Because the... The last, the most recent.
No, the last.
Because the... The device.
Yeah, the Society of Book Friends that has published the journal for 50 years will now merge with the Society of the Book Arts and Crafts.
Yes, something like that.
Or Friends of the Royal Library there have been also.
So we will close the journal down and start a new journal.
It's called Nearly Biblio but Biblis.
which is said to be, you know, the nickname of the Royal Library when it was in the Royal Castle.
Yes, Biblis.
How frequently do you publish quarterly?
It's a quarterly, yes.
So it will be... Yes, I will show it.
Yes, thank you.
It will be a much, well, hopefully better, grander, more beautiful... It's quite cool already, if I may say so.
And, well, a better journal on rare books, a little bit more academic, maybe.
Which is good.
Yes, it is good, because... It won't be too much.
No, it's a balance.
It all depends on where you try to reach for your readership.
Quality not the same as academic.
You know, one of the criticisms of Biblio is that maybe it's not scholarly enough.
And my attitude is, we've got the book collector.
We have these journals that do that.
I wrote a gentle madness for readers who care.
I also wrote for the general reader.
And I really, truly believe that that's an important... In other words, you couldn't have to get the population to grow.
That's right.
I can just show you.
This is the very peak of the journal.
It's 1959.
uh the the the headline reads the king is reading the king can't read
No, I was at the inauguration of the royal library, the new opening of the house.
And the king, the Swedish king, couldn't say library in Swedish name for library.
He said books instead.
He and me, we divide one thing.
I'm an Abraham, I have a problem with dyslexia.
But the king is a rather serious problem.
It's very beautiful.
Yes, I can just show you.
This was a very tight journal, you see.
It was a very small topology and had quite a lot of articles in it.
And then this is 1994.
It's one of the last numbers before I became the editor.
And it's very, well, it's very ugly, actually, and it's very boring.
It was mostly on modern bookbinders.
In literature, more than books?
Yes, literature, more than books.
How many copies did you credit?
Well, in those times, it was 6,000.
Yes, it was quite many, yes.
And then it was down to about 1,000, 1994.
And then came along.
Then I came along.
This is the first issue that I was the editor for, when Uwe wrote on Curiosity Cabinets and things like that.
I saw an editor on Seven-Headed Pilgras in Hamburg.
You are a graphic designer, right?
No, I'm not.
I'm a copywriter, actually, but I have friends who are...